# gcatlib
Gene and Chromosome Analysis Toolkit (gcat) is a C++ library for most
common tasks associated with genomic data files such as for parsing
FASTX, SAM/BAM, and GTF files. gcat is conceptually identical to 
[`pysam`](https://pysam.readthedocs.io/en/latest/api.html) and 
[`HTseq`](https://htseq.readthedocs.io/en/latest/), and 
borrows ideas from them.

## Installation
`gcat` is dependent on `HTSlib`. `HTSlib` can be downloaded from
[here](https://www.htslib.org/download/) and can be installed by
following the procedure under 'Basic Installation' described
[here](https://github.com/samtools/htslib/blob/develop/INSTALL)

Untar the source files using:
```
tar -xf gcatlib-0.0.1.tar.gz
```

Create a build directory with:
```
cd gcatlib-0.0.1
mkdir build 
cd build
```

`gcatlib` is installed using the `autotools` build system.  The first
step is to run a configuration script to generate the required
Makefiles. The parameters to `configure` will vary based on where the
dependent libraries are installed, and where we would like `gcatlib`
to be installed. 

If `HTSlib` is installed in the standard system path (typically
`/usr/bin` and `/usr/lib`), and if we would like `gcatlib` to be
installed in the standard system path, use the following: 

```
../configure
```

If `HTSlib` is installed in a non-standard directory,
the `configure` script should be executed with:
```
../configure CPPFLAGS='-I/path_to_htslib/include' LDFLAGS='-L/path_to_htslib/lib'
```

To install `gcatlib` in a non-standard directory use:
```
../configure --prefix installation_path
```

Append the `CPPFLAGS` and `LDFLAGS` to the above command the dependent
libraries are in non-standard paths.


The configuration is now complete and the build system is ready to
compile all the programs with:
```
make [-j threads]
```
This will generate the libraries into the `build` directory.


Finally, install gcatlib with:
```
make install
```
This will copy all the header files into `installation_path/include` and
the library files into `installation_path/lib`.


Of note, if you have cloned the Git repo, it does not include the
`configure` script. This can be generated by executing:
```
autoreconf -i
```
After which the configuration and installation can proceed as usual.


## Contact
Rishvanth Prabakar: kaliapp@cshl.edu

## License
Copyright (C) 2025 Rishvanth Prabakar

Authors: Rish Prabakar

This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the Free
Software Foundation; either version 2 of the License, or (at your option)
any later version.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS
FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. See the GNU General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License along
with this program; if not, write to the Free Software Foundation, Inc.,
51 Franklin Street, Fifth Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA.
